---
title: Council resolutions
phase: Alpha
permalink: /missions/council-resolutions
layout: mission
repo_url: 
backlog_url:  
---

## Mission
Problem statement: Council decisions are stored and shared in PDF documents that are cumbersome and time-consuming to read. The council secretariat cannot follow through on action items that are allocated to cluster managers and subsequent units, the cluster managers are unable to view the tasks that have been assigned to them easily and it takes a while for officials with action items to get records of the decisions and updates due to the convoluted and time-consuming process. Overall, transparency in decisions, task allocations, follow-through and reporting becomes a challenge

The primary objectives for Q1 of year 2 were multifold. Firstly, the goal was to secure buy-in and ownership of an automated council resolution process. Our goal was to onboard city officials from ETK, specifically from the Council Secretariat and the Information Management Unit (IMU), onto this use case to collaborate in building and adopting a new system that we chose together. Secondly, the goal was to have multiple user engagements with primary users, such as the Council Secretariat and Line Departments, to understand their unique needs and expectations and get their feedback on the Microsoft prototype tool through engagement sessions. Thirdly, we wanted to start testing whether the Microsoft-based prototype fits the needs of the primary users.

## User needs
This use case aims to address the laborious process of recording, collating, and distributing council meeting minutes and decisions in the municipality. There are large inefficiencies in the processes and technology used in compiling council resolution documents, posing several challenges for stakeholders. For example, the council secretariat (primary user) struggles to follow through on action items, and council meeting attendees are unable to easily view the tasks that have been assigned to them. While these documents are available to the public, they are currently in a format and platform that are hard to dissect and understand. As such, residents avoid engagement with council minutes and struggle to learn about, or engage with, important council decisions.
## Roadmap

### What we have done
Despite initial hurdles, we managed to set up an initial user engagement session, successfully onboarding the Council Secretariat to the use case. This was a significant milestone, as it allowed us to establish fortnightly sprint meetings with them, facilitating frequent feedback and engagement. The Council Secretariat, struggling with their current manual processes, showed an earnest eagerness to adopt the idea of a new system due to the potential value it offers.

Following this first engagement, the Council Secretariat introduced us to two line department heads who also engage with the manual process. They highlighted their difficulties with the time-consuming task of reading through council resolution documents and assigning tasks to their departments. This engagement provided us with valuable insights into their specific pain points and processes, which differ from those of the Secretariat. It also helped to broaden our user base, involving more city officials and fostering wider adoption of the use case.

A significant achievement was our first in-person meeting with ETK city officials, including the Council Secretariat and IMU. This face-to-face interaction was crucial for building a better understanding of the use case and solidifying relationships with the city. It was particularly important to have colleagues from IMU in the room, as these particular colleagues had no prior knowledge of the programme. The Secretariat's support was instrumental in onboarding IMU, who then asked for an internal meeting with the city’s Strategy Office for further context and a business case template to be filled out with business requirements for the solution. Initially, they did not want to engage further on this use case until that meeting occurred. However, they then said they would be open to working on the business case together. We are currently working on these business requirements as a mitigating action for the next quarter, hoping to align with IMU's processes and gain their support.

Regarding the technical side, we have been testing a council resolution prototype originally created by Microsoft for Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality and shared with us by ETK. We used Q1 to test this prototype according to the needs of the Council Secretariat. Moreover, we created a form with additional fields relevant to ETK and, based on the information they gave us, determined if it could be repurposed for their needs. This form was created using the resolution’s register document that was shared with us by Theresa Ndlovu; this will hopefully replace the spreadsheet that Theresa fills out at this point in the process. Following, we visualised this data on PowerBI (dashboard), which, it is hoped, will eventually be used to gather information to make decisions more quickly. Although we visualised some of the requested dashboards, concerns from IMU about the cost of Microsoft licences for PowerApps have led us to start exploring options such as SharePoint as a potentially lower-cost alternative. We are currently researching different solutions to ensure the most cost-effective option is selected that meets the Secretariat and line departments' needs for efficiency and data visualisation. 

After all our meaningful user engagements with the city, we have been able to confirm a few assumptions that we had previously made. If this process becomes more efficient and automated, decisions that have been approved will be easily trackable. Currently, line departments sometimes miss decisions in lengthy and unsearchable documents, and then residents have to wait longer for tasks to be completed, e.g., the installation of street lamps. Sometimes a decision gets completely lost, having a very real and negative impact on residents. Indeed, line department heads can often spend over two days looking through the resolution’s register to find the decisions that relate to their clusters. This is highly inefficient as they have other very important on-the-ground work (e.g., disaster management) to do, and losing these days to unnecessarily long admin tasks jeopardises the livelihoods of residents. 

The city is legally required to follow this process. However, because it is so inefficient, they are often not able to complete a process that they are legally obligated to complete. Improving this process would have a positive trickle-down effect on residents, and so it is important that we progress with this use case with IMU and the Secretariat onboard, and together we choose the solution that has the highest chance of adoption. Keeping in mind that the chosen system needs to potentially become public-facing so that it can also be used as an accountability tool in the future.

### What we are working on
Building the form out in SharePoint. 
### What we are exploring next
How to make publish this automated data externally for the public/residents. 
